.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Dug Song <dugsong@monkey.org>
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd August 21, 2001
.Dt DNET 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dnet
.Nd dumb networking library
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <dnet.h>
.Ss Addressing
.Ft int
.Fn addr_cmp "struct addr *a" "struct addr *b"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_bcast "struct addr *a" "struct addr *b"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_ntop "struct addr *src" "char *dst" "size_t size"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_pton "char *src" "struct addr *dst"
.Ft char *
.Fn addr_ntoa "struct addr *a"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_aton "char *src" "struct addr *dst"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_ntos "struct addr *a" "struct sockaddr *sa"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_ston "struct sockaddr *sa" "struct addr *a"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_btos "u_short bits" "struct sockaddr *sa"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_stob "struct sockaddr *sa" "u_short *bits"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_btom "u_short bits" "void *mask" "size_t size"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_mtob "void *mask" "size_t size" "u_short *bits"
.Ss Address Resolution Protocol
.Pp
.Li typedef Ar int Fn (*arp_handler) "struct addr *pa" "struct addr *ha" "void *arg"
.Ft arp_t *
.Fn arp_open "void"
.Ft int
.Fn arp_add "arp_t *a" "struct addr *pa" "struct addr *ha"
.Ft int
.Fn arp_delete "arp_t *a" "struct addr *pa"
.Ft int
.Fn arp_get "arp_t *a" "struct addr *pa" "struct addr *ha"
.Ft int
.Fn arp_loop "arp_t *a" "arp_handler callback" "void *arg"
.Ft int
.Fn arp_close "arp_t *a"
.Ss Ethernet
.Ft eth_t *
.Fn eth_open "char *device"
.Ft int
.Fn eth_set "eth_t *e" "eth_addr_t *ea"
.Ft int
.Fn eth_get "eth_t *e" "eth_addr_t *ea"
.Ft ssize_t
.Fn eth_send "eth_t *e" "const void *buf" "size_t len"
.Ft int
.Fn eth_close "eth_t *e"
.Ss Firewalling
.Pp
.Li typedef Ar int Fn (*fw_handler) "struct fw_rule *rule" "void *arg"
.Ft fw_t *
.Fn fw_open "void"
.Ft int
.Fn fw_add "fw_t *f" "struct fw_rule *rule"
.Ft int
.Fn fw_delete "fw_t *f" "struct fw_rule *rule"
.Ft int
.Fn fw_loop "fw_t *f" "fw_handler callback" "void *arg"
.Ft int
.Fn fw_close "fw_t *f"
.Ss Interfaces
.Pp
.Li typedef Ar int Fn (*intf_handler) "char *device" "struct intf_info *info" "void *arg"
.Ft intf_t *
.Fn intf_open "void"
.\".Ft int
.\".Fn intf_add "intf_t *i" "char *device" "struct addr *addr"
.\".Ft int
.\".Fn intf_delete "intf_t *i" "char *device" "struct addr *addr"
.Ft int
.Fn intf_set "intf_t *i" "char *device" "struct addr *addr" "int *flags"
.Ft int
.Fn intf_get "intf_t *i" "char *device" "struct addr *addr" "int *flags"
.Ft int
.Fn intf_loop "intf_t *i" "intf_handler callback" "void *arg"
.Ft int
.Fn intf_close "void"
.Ss Internet Protocol
.Ft ip_t *
.Fn ip_open "void"
.Ft size_t
.Fn ip_add_option "void *buf" "size_t len" "int proto" "const void *optbuf" "size_t optlen"
.Ft void
.Fn ip_checksum "void *buf" "size_t len"
.Ft ssize_t
.Fn ip_send "ip_t *i" "const void *buf" "size_t len"
.Ft int
.Fn ip_close "ip_t *i"
.Ss Routing
.Pp
.Li typedef Ar int Fn (*route_handler) "struct addr *dst" "struct addr *gw" "void *arg"
.Ft route_t *
.Fn route_open "void"
.Ft int
.Fn route_add "route_t *r" "struct addr *dst" "struct addr *gw"
.Ft int
.Fn route_delete "route_t *r" "struct addr *dst"
.Ft int
.Fn route_get "route_t *r" "struct addr *dst" "struct addr *gw"
.Ft int
.Fn route_loop "route_t *r" "route_handler callback" "void *arg"
.Ft int
.Fn route_close "route_t *r"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
provides a simplified, portable interface to several low-level
networking routines, including network address manipulation, kernel
.Xr arp 4
cache and 
.Xr route 4
table lookup and manipulation, network firewalling, network interface
lookup and manipulation, and raw IP packet and Ethernet frame
transmission. It is intended to complement the functionality provided
by
.Xr pcap 3 .
.Pp
In addition, 
.Nm
also provides platform-independent definitions of various network
protocol formats and values for portable low-level network
programming.
.Pp
.Ss Addressing
All network addresses adhere to a general structure, described below.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct addr {
	u_short			addr_type;
	u_short			addr_bits;
	union {
		eth_addr_t	__eth;
		ip_addr_t	__ip;
		
		u_int8_t	__data8[20];
		u_int16_t	__data16[10];
		u_int32_t	__data32[5];
	} __addr_u;
};
#define addr_eth	__addr_u.__eth
#define addr_ip		__addr_u.__ip
#define addr_data8	__addr_u.__data8
#define addr_data16	__addr_u.__data16
#define addr_data32	__addr_u.__data32
.Ed
.Pp
The following address values for
.Ar addr_type
are known to the system:
.Bd -literal
#define	ADDR_TYPE_ETH		1	/* Ethernet */
#define	ADDR_TYPE_IP		2	/* Internet Protocol v4 */
.Ed
.Pp
The field
.Ar addr_bits
denotes the length of the network mask in bits.
.Pp
.Fn addr_cmp
compares network addresses
.Fa a
and
.Fa b ,
returning an integer less than, equal to, or greater than zero if
.Fa a
is found, respectively, to be less than, equal to, or greater than
.Fa b .
Both addresses must be of the same address type.
.Pp
.Fn addr_bcast
computes the broadcast address for the network specified in
.Fa a
and writes it into
.Fa b .
.Pp
.Fn addr_ntop
converts an address from network format to a string.
.Pp
.Fn addr_pton
converts an address (or hostname) from a string to network format.
.Pp
.Fn addr_ntoa
converts an address from network format to a string, returning a
pointer to the result in static memory.
.Pp
.Fn addr_aton
is a synonym for
.Fn addr_pton .
.Pp
.Fn addr_ntos
converts an address from network format to the appropriate struct
sockaddr.
.Pp
.Fn addr_ston
converts an address from a struct sockaddr to network format.
.Pp
.Fn addr_btos
converts a network mask length to a network mask specified as a struct
sockaddr.
.Pp
.Fn addr_stob
converts a network mask specified in a struct sockaddr to a network
mask length.
.Pp
.Fn addr_btom
converts a network mask length to a network mask in network byte
order.
.Pp
.Fn addr_mtob
converts a network mask in network byte order to a network mask length.
.Ss Address Resolution Protocol
.Fn arp_open
is used to obtain a handle to access the kernel
.Xr arp 4
cache.
.Pp
.Fn arp_add
adds a new ARP mapping for the protocol address
.Fa pa
to the hardware address
.Fa ha .
.Pp
.Fn arp_delete
deletes the ARP entry for the specified protocol address
.Fa pa .
.Pp
.Fn arp_get
retrieves the hardware address 
.Fa ha 
for the specified protocol address
.Fa pa .
.Pp
.Fn arp_loop
iterates over the kernel
.Xr arp 4
cache, invoking the specified
.Fa callback
with each entry's protocol address
.Fa pa ,
hardware address
.Fa ha ,
and the context
.Fa arg
passed to
.Fn arp_loop .
.Pp
.Fn arp_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Ss Ethernet
.Fn eth_open
is used to obtain a handle to transmit raw Ethernet frames via the
specified network
.Fa device .
.Pp
.Fn eth_set
configures the hardware MAC address for the interface specified by
.Ar e .
.Pp
.Fn eth_get
retrieves the hardware MAC address for the interface specified by
.Ar e .
.Pp
.Fn eth_send
transmits 
.Fa len
bytes of the Ethernet frame pointed to by
.Fa buf .
.Pp
.Fn eth_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Ss Firewalling
Firewall rules adhere to a general structure, described below.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct fw_rule {
	char		device[14];	/* interface name */
	u_char		op:4,		/* operation */
			direction:4;	/* direction */
	u_char		proto;		/* IP protocol */
	struct addr	src;		/* src address/net */
	struct addr	dst;		/* dst address/net */
	u_short		sport[2];	/* range or ICMP type/mask */
	u_short		dport[2];	/* range or ICMP code/mask */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The following values for
.Ar op
are known to the system:
.Bd -literal
#define FW_OP_ALLOW	1
#define FW_OP_BLOCK	2
.Ed
.Pp
The following values for
.Ar direction
are known to the system:
.Bd -literal
#define FW_DIR_IN	1
#define FW_DIR_OUT	2
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn fw_open
is used to obtain a handle to access the local network firewall
configuration.
.Pp
.Fn fw_add
adds the specified firewall
.Fa rule .
.Pp
.Fn fw_delete
deletes the specified firewall
.Fa rule .
.Pp
.Fn fw_loop
iterates over the active firewall ruleset, invoking
the specified 
.Fa callback
with each entry's
.Fa rule
and the context
.Fa arg
passed to 
.Fn fw_loop .
.Pp
.Fn fw_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp 
.Ss Interfaces
.Fn intf_open
is used to obtain a handle to access the local network interface
configuration.
.Pp
.Fn intf_set
configures the specified 
.Fa device
with the network address pointed to by
.Fa addr
(if non-null)
and/or the flag bitmask pointed to by
.Fa flags 
(if non-null).
.Pp
.Fn intf_get
retrieves the network address
.Fa addr
(if non-null, with its
.Fa type
field set)
and/or the interface flag bitmask pointed to by
.Fa flags
(if non-null)
for the specified interface
.Fa device .
.Pp
.Fn intf_loop
iterates over all active interfaces, invoking the specified 
.Fa callback
with each entry's interface
.Fa name ,
.Fa info ,
and the context
.Fa arg
passed to
.Fn intf_loop .
.Pp
.Fn intf_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Ss Internet Protocol
.Fn ip_open
is used to obtain a handle to transmit raw IP packets, routed by the
kernel.
.Pp
.Fn ip_add_option
adds the header option for the protocol
.Fa proto
specified by
.Fa optbuf
of length
.Fa optlen
and appends it to the appropriate header of the IP packet contained in
.Fa buf
of size
.Fa len ,
shifting any existing payload and adding NOPs to pad the option to
a word boundary if necessary.
.Pp
.Fn ip_checksum
sets the IP checksum and any appropriate transport protocol checksum
for the packet pointed to by
.Fa buf 
of length
.Fa len .
.Pp
.Fn ip_send
transmits
.Fa len
bytes of the IP packet pointed to by
.Fa buf .
.Pp
.Fn ip_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Ss Routing
.Fn route_open
is used to obtain a handle to access the kernel
.Xr route 4
table.
.Pp
.Fn route_add
adds a new route for the network address
.Fa dst
to the gateway address
.Fa gw .
.Pp
.Fn route_delete
deletes the route for the specified network address
.Fa dst .
.Pp
.Fn route_get
retrieves the gateway address
.Fa gw
for the specified network address
.Fa dst .
.Pp
.Fn route_loop
iterates over the kernel
.Xr route 4
table, invoking the specified
.Fa callback
with each entry's destination address
.Fa dst ,
gateway address
.Fa gw ,
and the context
.Fa arg
passed to
.Fn route_loop .
.Pp
.Fn route_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn addr_ntoa
returns a pointer to a static memory area containing the printable
address, or NULL on failure.
.Pp
.Fn arp_open ,
.Fn eth_open ,
.Fn fw_open ,
.Fn intf_open ,
.Fn ip_open ,
and
.Fn route_open
return a valid handle on success, or NULL on failure.
.Pp
.Pp
.Fn arp_loop ,
.Fn fw_loop ,
.Fn intf_loop ,
and
.Fn route_loop
return the status of their
.Fa callback
routines. Any non-zero return from a 
.Fa callback
will cause the loop to exit immediately.
.Pp
.Fn ip_add_opt
and
.Fn tcp_add_opt
return the length of the inserted option, which may have been padded
with NOPs to meet a word boundary, or -1 on failure.
.Pp
All other 
.Nm
routines return 0 on success, or -1 on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pcap 3
.Sh AUTHORS
Dug Song
.Aq dugsong@monkey.org
