.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Dug Song <dugsong@monkey.org>
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd August 21, 2001
.Dt DNET 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dnet
.Nd dumb networking library
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <dnet.h>
.Ss Network addressing
.Ft int
.Fn addr_cmp "const struct addr *a" "const struct addr *b"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_bcast "const struct addr *a" "struct addr *b"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_ntop "const struct addr *src" "char *dst" "size_t size"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_pton "const char *src" "struct addr *dst"
.Ft char *
.Fn addr_ntoa "const struct addr *a"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_aton "const char *src" "struct addr *dst"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_ntos "const struct addr *a" "struct sockaddr *sa"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_ston "const struct sockaddr *sa" "struct addr *a"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_btos "uint16_t bits" "struct sockaddr *sa"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_stob "const struct sockaddr *sa" "uint16_t *bits"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_btom "uint16_t bits" "void *mask" "size_t size"
.Ft int
.Fn addr_mtob "const void *mask" "size_t size" "uint16_t *bits"
.Ss Address Resolution Protocol
.Pp
.Li typedef Ar int Fn (*arp_handler) "const struct addr *pa" "const struct addr *ha" "void *arg"
.Ft arp_t *
.Fn arp_open "void"
.Ft int
.Fn arp_add "arp_t *a" "const struct addr *pa" "const struct addr *ha"
.Ft int
.Fn arp_delete "arp_t *a" "const struct addr *pa"
.Ft int
.Fn arp_get "arp_t *a" "const struct addr *pa" "struct addr *ha"
.Ft int
.Fn arp_loop "arp_t *a" "arp_handler callback" "void *arg"
.Ft arp_t *
.Fn arp_close "arp_t *a"
.Ss Ethernet
.Ft eth_t *
.Fn eth_open "const char *device"
.Ft int
.Fn eth_get "eth_t *e" "eth_addr_t *ea"
.Ft int
.Fn eth_set "eth_t *e" "const eth_addr_t *ea"
.Ft ssize_t
.Fn eth_send "eth_t *e" "const void *buf" "size_t len"
.Ft eth_t *
.Fn eth_close "eth_t *e"
.Ss Firewalling
.Pp
.Li typedef Ar int Fn (*fw_handler) "const struct fw_rule *rule" "void *arg"
.Ft fw_t *
.Fn fw_open "void"
.Ft int
.Fn fw_add "fw_t *f" "const struct fw_rule *rule"
.Ft int
.Fn fw_delete "fw_t *f" "const struct fw_rule *rule"
.Ft int
.Fn fw_loop "fw_t *f" "fw_handler callback" "void *arg"
.Ft fw_t *
.Fn fw_close "fw_t *f"
.Ss Network interfaces
.Pp
.Li typedef Ar int Fn (*intf_handler) "const char *device" "const struct intf_info *info" "void *arg"
.Ft intf_t *
.Fn intf_open "void"
.\".Ft int
.\".Fn intf_add "intf_t *i" "const char *device" "const struct addr *addr"
.\".Ft int
.\".Fn intf_delete "intf_t *i" "const char *device" "const struct addr *addr"
.Ft int
.Fn intf_get "intf_t *i" "const char *device" "struct intf_info *info"
.Ft int
.Fn intf_set "intf_t *i" "const char *device" "const struct intf_info *info"
.Ft int
.Fn intf_loop "intf_t *i" "intf_handler callback" "void *arg"
.Ft intf_t *
.Fn intf_close "intf_t *i"
.Ss Internet Protocol
.Ft ip_t *
.Fn ip_open "void"
.Ft size_t
.Fn ip_add_option "void *buf" "size_t len" "int proto" "const void *optbuf" "size_t optlen"
.Ft void
.Fn ip_checksum "void *buf" "size_t len"
.Ft ssize_t
.Fn ip_send "ip_t *i" "const void *buf" "size_t len"
.Ft ip_t *
.Fn ip_close "ip_t *i"
.Ss Routing
.Pp
.Li typedef Ar int Fn (*route_handler) "const struct addr *dst" "const struct addr *gw" "void *arg"
.Ft route_t *
.Fn route_open "void"
.Ft int
.Fn route_add "route_t *r" "const struct addr *dst" "const struct addr *gw"
.Ft int
.Fn route_delete "route_t *r" "const struct addr *dst"
.Ft int
.Fn route_get "route_t *r" "const struct addr *dst" "struct addr *gw"
.Ft int
.Fn route_loop "route_t *r" "route_handler callback" "void *arg"
.Ft route_t *
.Fn route_close "route_t *r"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
provides a simplified, portable interface to several low-level
networking routines, including network address manipulation, kernel
.Xr arp 4
cache and 
.Xr route 4
table lookup and manipulation, network firewalling, network interface
lookup and manipulation, and raw IP packet and Ethernet frame
transmission. It is intended to complement the functionality provided
by
.Xr pcap 3 .
.Pp
In addition, 
.Nm
also provides platform-independent definitions of various network
protocol formats and values for portable low-level network
programming.
.Pp
.Ss Network addressing
Network addresses are described by the following structure:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct addr {
	uint16_t		addr_type;
	uint16_t		addr_bits;
	union {
		eth_addr_t	__eth;
		ip_addr_t	__ip;
		
		uint8_t		__data8[20];
		uint16_t	__data16[10];
		uint32_t	__data32[5];
	} __addr_u;
};
#define addr_eth	__addr_u.__eth
#define addr_ip		__addr_u.__ip
#define addr_data8	__addr_u.__data8
#define addr_data16	__addr_u.__data16
#define addr_data32	__addr_u.__data32
.Ed
.Pp
The following values are defined for
.Ar addr_type :
.Bd -literal
#define	ADDR_TYPE_ETH		1	/* Ethernet */
#define	ADDR_TYPE_IP		2	/* Internet Protocol v4 */
.Ed
.Pp
The field
.Ar addr_bits
denotes the length of the network mask in bits.
.Pp
.Fn addr_cmp
compares network addresses
.Fa a
and
.Fa b ,
returning an integer less than, equal to, or greater than zero if
.Fa a
is found, respectively, to be less than, equal to, or greater than
.Fa b .
Both addresses must be of the same address type.
.Pp
.Fn addr_bcast
computes the broadcast address for the network specified in
.Fa a
and writes it into
.Fa b .
.Pp
.Fn addr_ntop
converts an address from network format to a string.
.Pp
.Fn addr_pton
converts an address (or hostname) from a string to network format.
.Pp
.Fn addr_ntoa
converts an address from network format to a string, returning a
pointer to the result in static memory.
.Pp
.Fn addr_aton
is a synonym for
.Fn addr_pton .
.Pp
.Fn addr_ntos
converts an address from network format to the appropriate struct
sockaddr.
.Pp
.Fn addr_ston
converts an address from a struct sockaddr to network format.
.Pp
.Fn addr_btos
converts a network mask length to a network mask specified as a struct
sockaddr.
.Pp
.Fn addr_stob
converts a network mask specified in a struct sockaddr to a network
mask length.
.Pp
.Fn addr_btom
converts a network mask length to a network mask in network byte
order.
.Pp
.Fn addr_mtob
converts a network mask in network byte order to a network mask length.
.Ss Address Resolution Protocol
.Fn arp_open
is used to obtain a handle to access the kernel
.Xr arp 4
cache.
.Pp
.Fn arp_add
adds a new ARP mapping for the protocol address
.Fa pa
to the hardware address
.Fa ha .
.Pp
.Fn arp_delete
deletes the ARP entry for the specified protocol address
.Fa pa .
.Pp
.Fn arp_get
retrieves the hardware address 
.Fa ha 
for the specified protocol address
.Fa pa .
.Pp
.Fn arp_loop
iterates over the kernel
.Xr arp 4
cache, invoking the specified
.Fa callback
with each entry's protocol address
.Fa pa ,
hardware address
.Fa ha ,
and the context
.Fa arg
passed to
.Fn arp_loop .
.Pp
.Fn arp_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Ss Ethernet
.Fn eth_open
is used to obtain a handle to transmit raw Ethernet frames via the
specified network
.Fa device .
.Pp
.Fn eth_get
retrieves the hardware MAC address for the interface specified by
.Ar e .
.Pp
.Fn eth_set
configures the hardware MAC address for the interface specified by
.Ar e .
.Pp
.Fn eth_send
transmits 
.Fa len
bytes of the Ethernet frame pointed to by
.Fa buf .
.Pp
.Fn eth_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Ss Firewalling
Firewall rules are described by the following structure:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct fw_rule {
	char		fw_device[14];	/* interface name */
	uint8_t		fw_op:4,	/* operation */
			fw_dir:4;	/* direction */
	uint8_t		fw_proto;	/* IP protocol */
	struct addr	fw_src;		/* src address or net */
	struct addr	fw_dst;		/* dst address or net */
	uint16_t	fw_sport[2];	/* range or ICMP type/mask */
	uint16_t	fw_dport[2];	/* range or ICMP code/mask */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The following values are defined for 
.Ar fw_op :
.Bd -literal
#define FW_OP_ALLOW	1
#define FW_OP_BLOCK	2
.Ed
.Pp
The following values are defined for
.Ar fw_dir :
.Bd -literal
#define FW_DIR_IN	1
#define FW_DIR_OUT	2
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn fw_open
is used to obtain a handle to access the local network firewall
configuration.
.Pp
.Fn fw_add
adds the specified firewall
.Fa rule .
.Pp
.Fn fw_delete
deletes the specified firewall
.Fa rule .
.Pp
.Fn fw_loop
iterates over the active firewall ruleset, invoking
the specified 
.Fa callback
with each entry's
.Fa rule
and the context
.Fa arg
passed to 
.Fn fw_loop .
.Pp
.Fn fw_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp 
.Ss Network interfaces
Network interface information is described by the following structure:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct intf_info {
	uint32_t	intf_info;	/* bitmask of fields set */
	struct addr	intf_addr;	/* interface IP address */
	uint32_t	intf_flags;	/* interface flags */
	uint32_t	intf_mtu;	/* interface MTU */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The following bitmask values are defined for
.Ar intf_info :
.Bd -literal
#define INTF_INFO_ADDR	0x01		/* intf_addr is set */
#define INTF_INFO_FLAGS	0x02		/* intf_flags is set */
#define INTF_INFO_MTU	0x04		/* intf_mtu is set */
.Ed
.Pp
The following bitmask values are defined for
.Ar intf_flags :
.Bd -literal
#define INTF_FLAG_UP		0x01	/* enable interface */
#define INTF_FLAG_LOOPBACK	0x02	/* is a loopback net (r/o) */
#define INTF_FLAG_POINTOPOINT	0x04	/* point-to-point link (r/o) */
#define INTF_FLAG_NOARP		0x08	/* disable arp */
#define INTF_FLAG_MULTICAST	0x10	/* supports multicast (r/o) */
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn intf_open
is used to obtain a handle to access the network interface
configuration.
.Pp
.Fn intf_get
retrieves the configuration
.Fa info
for the specified 
.Fa device .
.Pp
.Fn intf_set
configures the specified 
.Fa device
with the configuration 
.Fa info .
.Pp
.Fn intf_loop
iterates over all network interfaces, invoking the specified 
.Fa callback
with each entry's configuration
.Fa info 
and the context
.Fa arg
passed to
.Fn intf_loop .
.Pp
.Fn intf_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Ss Internet Protocol
.Fn ip_open
is used to obtain a handle to transmit raw IP packets, routed by the
kernel.
.Pp
.Fn ip_add_option
adds the header option for the protocol
.Fa proto
specified by
.Fa optbuf
of length
.Fa optlen
and appends it to the appropriate header of the IP packet contained in
.Fa buf
of size
.Fa len ,
shifting any existing payload and adding NOPs to pad the option to
a word boundary if necessary.
.Pp
.Fn ip_checksum
sets the IP checksum and any appropriate transport protocol checksum
for the packet pointed to by
.Fa buf 
of length
.Fa len .
.Pp
.Fn ip_send
transmits
.Fa len
bytes of the IP packet pointed to by
.Fa buf .
.Pp
.Fn ip_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Ss Routing
.Fn route_open
is used to obtain a handle to access the kernel
.Xr route 4
table.
.Pp
.Fn route_add
adds a new route for the network address
.Fa dst
to the gateway address
.Fa gw .
.Pp
.Fn route_delete
deletes the route for the specified network address
.Fa dst .
.Pp
.Fn route_get
retrieves the gateway address
.Fa gw
for the specified network address
.Fa dst .
.Pp
.Fn route_loop
iterates over the kernel
.Xr route 4
table, invoking the specified
.Fa callback
with each entry's destination address
.Fa dst ,
gateway address
.Fa gw ,
and the context
.Fa arg
passed to
.Fn route_loop .
.Pp
.Fn route_close
closes the specified handle.
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn addr_ntoa
returns a pointer to a static memory area containing the printable
address, or NULL on failure.
.Pp
.Fn arp_open ,
.Fn eth_open ,
.Fn fw_open ,
.Fn intf_open ,
.Fn ip_open ,
and
.Fn route_open
return a valid handle on success, or NULL on failure.
.Pp
.Fn arp_close ,
.Fn eth_close ,
.Fn fw_close ,
.Fn intf_close ,
.Fn ip_close ,
and
.Fn route_close
always return NULL.
.Pp
.Fn eth_send
and
.Fn ip_send
return the length of the datagram successfully sent, or -1 on failure.
.Pp
.Fn arp_loop ,
.Fn fw_loop ,
.Fn intf_loop ,
and
.Fn route_loop
return the status of their
.Fa callback
routines. Any non-zero return from a 
.Fa callback
will cause the loop to exit immediately.
.Pp
.Fn ip_add_option
returns the length of the inserted option, which may have been padded
with NOPs to meet a word boundary, or -1 on failure.
.Pp
All other 
.Nm
routines return 0 on success, or -1 on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pcap 3
.Sh AUTHORS
Dug Song
.Aq dugsong@monkey.org
